#LyX 2.0 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 413
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass MPSthesis
\use_default_options false
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package none
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding default
\font_roman default
\font_sans default
\font_typewriter default
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100

\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_amsmath 1
\use_esint 1
\use_mhchem 0
\use_mathdots 0
\cite_engine basic
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\use_refstyle 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Chapter
Conclusion and further work 
\begin_inset CommandInset label
LatexCommand label
name "chap:Conclusion"

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Fast and accurate performance evaluation is of essential importance for
 the planning and optimization of mobile radio networks.
 In this thesis, several high-performance and novel methods for the analysis
 and optimization of radio networks were developed and discussed.
 Some of them even outperform state-of-the-art methods, to which they were
 compared, in terms of result accuracy and instance-size complexity.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The snapshot analysis is best suited for the detailed performance evaluation
 of radio networks.
 The performance of a snapshot method is mainly influenced by two factors.
 First, the performance of the method for modeling a single snapshot and,
 second, the quality level of the estimate applied for obtaining the interest
 figures from the individual snapshot results.
 Both topics were comprehensively addressed in this thesis.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
While providing detailed and accurate results for various applications in
 network planning, the snapshot analysis is too time-consuming to be applied
 in radio-network optimization, where typically a large number of different
 configurations need to be compared in a shorter time-frame.
 To this end, a parallel framework for radio-network planning was presented
 in this thesis.
 The framework is very flexible in terms of air-interface modeling, e.g.,
 different QoS schemes, and is of significantly higher computational-time
 performance compared with any currently available solution known to the
 author.
 Moreover, it incorporates multi-GPU support and the corresponding parallel-prog
ramming techniques that are required to exploit the computational power
 of such hardware.
 The performance gain results mainly due to the combination of a novel parallel-
programming approach and some state-of-the-art methods.
 The achieved performance improvement excels in radio-network optimization
 environments.
 Further research in this field will include abstracting the introduced
 MWD principle into a multi-purpose parallel framework such as Charm++
\begin_inset space ~
\end_inset


\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citep
key "Kale-The_Charm_Approach:2013"

\end_inset

, which provides a functionality for overlapping execution and communication,
 as well as fault tolerance.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
When applying automatic network optimization, a fast and accurate performance
 analysis is of crucial importance.
 However, an overview of the related literature shown that this fact seems
 to have been only partially taken into consideration in the design of several
 optimization methods for radio networks.
 A common approach is to apply a detailed and too time-consuming method
 for evaluating different candidate solutions, resulting in an unacceptable
 computational-time complexity for medium to large-sized problem instances.
 The opposite approach, which is even less satisfactory, is to build fast
 but inaccurate models, the results of which do not sufficiently correlate
 with reality.
 To this end, the quality and speed performance of the presented framework
 was empirically verified with an industrial software tool for radio-network
 planning.
 The results clearly show a very good agreement in terms of accuracy of
 the radio-propagation predictions, compared to those obtained with the
 commercial tool.
 Additionally, the results demonstrated the performance advantage of the
 framework compared to the computational time of the enterprise software.
 It is important to note that these results also apply for an application
 in everyday network planning.
 However, to ultimate validate the complete array of radio-planning activities
 the framework can handle requires some further research, which has already
 started.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Increasing the performance of the simulations involved during the objective-func
tion evaluation is only the first step towards a practical running-time
 reduction for radio-network optimization.
 In this sense, the performance of the novel agent-based algorithm presented
 in this thesis was tested while solving the service-coverage problem in
 radio networks.
 The results show significant gains with respect to the size of problem
 instances, as well as regarding its speed performance and solution quality,
 even outperforming a state-of-the-art method, to which it was compared.
 Further research will include experimentation with different parameters
 and optimization problems, in order to gain better understanding of the
 dynamics that guide the algorithm through the search space of the problem.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The new optimization problem for 3G radio networks indentified in this thesis
 deals with SHO balancing of downlink and uplink areas.
 The problem was tacled by three different metaheuristic algorithms, the
 solutions of which show a substantial improvement of downlink and uplink
 balance.
 A challenge for future work is to evaluate this optimization problem in
 a dynamic context.
 This requires using a full-stack simulation tool that includes dynamic
 effects, such as fast power control.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The clutter-loss optimization method developed in this thesis makes use
 of the tools discussed above, providing a faster, more accurate and simpler
 method that replaces a manual approach.
 It applies a metaheuristic algorithm which has been tailored for the special
 requirements of the automatic clutter-loss optimization.
 The presented results make the benefits of an automated-optimization approach
 evident.
 Furthermore, in the context of other radio-coverage planning activities
 carried out at the Radio Network department of Telekom Slovenije, d.d., supplemen
tary testing of the framework as a coverage-planning tool is currently being
 conducted.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
PRATO, the radio-planning framework presented is this thesis, is free and
 open-source software.
 For this reason, it can be readily modified and extended to support, for
 example, other propagation models and post-processing algorithms.
 This characteristic provides it with a clear advantage when compared to
 commercial and closed-source tools.
 The source code is available for download from the author's home page,
 http://csd.ijs.si/benedicic/.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The constantly improving performance of computer hardware might allow an
 even more detailed analysis of networks in the near future.
 In this sense, a major challenge, that will require further research, is
 to extend the presented models and algorithms, e.g., by incorporating user
 mobility and traffic dynamics.
 This is especially important due to different existing and emerging mobile
 technologies.
 Indeed, the co-existence of multiple technologies will motivate an increasing
 interest about the combined analysis and optimization of different technologies
 and their mutual dependency.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Scientific contributions
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The work in this thesis has led to the following original contributions
 to science:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Design and development of an unified framework for radio-network planning
 and optimization, incorporating the second and third items, as well as
 experimentation on real-world radio networks.
 The experimentation includes a comparison with a commercial tool that is
 currently being used for real radio-network planning.
 Moreover, the parallel implementation of the framework exploits the computing
 resources of computer clusters and GPUs.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Proposal of a new approach for parallel programming that combines a classic
 master-worker method with an external database.
 The proposed approach improves the scalability of the classic master-worker
 paradigm by preventing the master process to become the bottleneck of a
 parallel system.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Quality improvement of radio-propagation predictions by applying metaheuristic-o
ptimization techniques that improve the quality of results.
 This technique enables the adaptation of radio-propagation models to the
 local environment over which a radio network is deployed, as well as the
 automatic optimization of signal losses due to clutter.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
A new algorithm, based on autonomous agents, to tackle the service-coverage
 problem in radio networks.
 The algorithm deals with problem instances that are out-of-reach of other
 compared state-of-the-art techniques used as reference.
 It also reaches good quality of solutions if compared to classic network-planni
ng techniques.
 The proposed approach is especially suitable for optimizing large radio
 networks.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Identification and formalization of a new optimization problem in 3G radio
 networks that deals with SHO alignment of downlink and uplink areas.
 By solving this problem, network malfunctioning is avoided in areas where
 there is SHO capability in the uplink, but none in the downlink.
 So far, this problem has not been formalized nor tackled by means of automatic
 optimization.
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
