#LyX 2.0 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 413
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass book
\use_default_options false
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package none
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding default
\font_roman default
\font_sans default
\font_typewriter default
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100

\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry true
\use_amsmath 1
\use_esint 1
\use_mhchem 0
\use_mathdots 0
\cite_engine basic
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\use_refstyle 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Chapter
Performance assessment within real network-planning scenarios
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout

% First paragraph has no indentation.
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\noindent
In this chapter, real-world, network-planning activities on different radio
 networks are presented.
 The objective is to compare PRATO with a radio-prediction enterprise tool
 in terms of quality and performance.
 To this end, the engineers of the Radio Network department at Telekom Slovenije
, d.d., provided us with their radio-prediction industrial software and guidelines
 to perform some typical radio-planning activities.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Note Note
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
---- el texto siguiente sirve como base para el final ----
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Measurements and simulation comparison
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We have also developed two modules for the evaluation of the accuracy of
 the designed radio coverage prediction tool with respect to the actually
 measured results.
 The first module, db.CompareResults, compares the calculated values with
 the values obtained during a field measurement campaign.
 The module reads each row of the text file with field measurement data
 and saves the x and y coordinates, the measured signal level and the name
 of the cell.
 The module first maps the coordinates to the nearest coordinates in the
 database (as they do not necessarily coincide), finds the corresponding
 row in the database and then extracts the received signal level for the
 required cell.
 The data for the measured and calculated signal level, their difference
 in decibels along with the location, the used path loss prediction model
 and the cell name are finally written to the output text file (Table 3).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The second module, r.EvaluateSimulations, compares the field measurements
 and the strongest simulation signal levels, neglecting the information
 about the serving cell.
 The module output is a textual file including the same fields as the output
 of the db.CompareResults module.
 The module enables comparison of field measurements with simulation results
 calculated with the designed radio coverage prediction tool or the commercial
 tool TEMS.
 Because of different input raster files (a GRASS raster file includes values
 for maximal received power while a TEMS raster file contains path loss
 values) additional selection is done with the “GRASS MaxPower raster”.
 In the case of the TEMS input raster file, an average transmitted power
 value must be entered for the receive power calculation.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Coverage-prediction performance analysis
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The performance and accuracy of the developed modules for radio signal coverage
 prediction was investigated by comparing simulation results and field measureme
nts.
 The reference values were obtained by comparing field measurements with
 simulation results acquired from the professional radio signal coverage
 prediction program TEMS.
 In both simulation tools we used the modification of the Okumura-Hata propagati
on model [23].
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The performance of the new software package was investigated for different
 types of networks (GSM, UMTS) and terrains (hilly and almost flat rural,
 urban, and suburban).
 The evaluation of the developed software for different frequency bands
 is presented first, followed by an analysis for a different terrain type.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The accuracy of the GRASS prediction software can be verified from the charts
 on Fig.
 6, 7 and 8.
 On the left side, the charts comparing the measurements and calculations
 with the GRASS radio coverage prediction software are depicted, while graphs
 showing the comparison between the measurements and calculations with the
 TEMS software package are on the right.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Fig.
 6 and 7 are presenting the simulation results from both tools and the field
 measurements in suburban environment for 900MHz and 2040MHz.
 Received power charts clearly shows that the simulation results match the
 measured values rather well.
 Slightly better agreement can be perceived in the 900MHz frequency band
 (Fig.
 7).
 The deviation among the measurements and simulations for both software
 applications is depicted in the second raw of diagrams in Fig.
 6 and 7.
 It is evident that the difference between the diagrams on the left- and
 on the right-hand side for both frequencies is minor.
 Thus, it can be concluded that the results from the developed radio coverage
 tool are comparable with the results from the TEMS application and are
 independent from the used frequency band.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Additional analyses were done on different terrain types.
 The analyses for the flat rural environment are depicted in Fig.
 8.
 The curves on the charts showing the difference between the measurements
 and simulations for both software applications have similar course.
 This confirms applicability of the developed software also for arbitrary
 terrain types.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The developed radio coverage software gives similar results as the professional
 TEMS software irrespective of the operational frequency or chosen terrain
 type.
 The computed values are comparable also for different distances between
 the base station and the receiver.
 Some negligible differences between the results originate from the fact
 that the implemented path loss model in the TEMS software used in the simulatio
n is not entirely available and thus cannot be realized in the GRASS software
 in a completely identical way.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Additionally, execution performance of the developed modules was evaluated
 in terms of the required processing times on our system (processor Intel
 Core2 Quad CPU 2,66GHz, disk WD2500KS, OS Linux RHEL5).
 The simulated configuration included eight transmission antennas on four
 locations (base stations), therefore requiring four model and eight sector
 computations.
 Two different geographic regions were used: a small one, “Ljutomer”, encompassi
ng all transmission locations (15 x 13km, resolution 25m) and a large one
 “Slovenia” (whole Slovenia, 285 x 185km, resolution 100m).
 The effective transmission radius was limited to 10km.
 The results for single core execution are given in Table 4.
 The hataDEM model was not simulated for the whole Slovenia region since
 its clutter map was not available to us.
 The r.MaxPower module was not run with DBF database on the whole Slovenia
 region since the internal GRASS DBF processing is very memory inefficient,
 keeping the whole database in the main memory and hence running out of
 memory for large regions.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Summary
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Precise and efficient planning of the wireless telecommunication systems
 requires efficient and exact radio signal coverage calculations.
 The high price and limited functionalities of the existing professional
 network planning tools compels to look for alternative solutions.
 The needs can be fulfilled using an open-source system which gives possibilitie
s to improve the existing models based on measurements, or to develop entirely
 new path loss prediction models.
 This paper presented a radio signal coverage prediction software tool developed
 for the open-source GRASS system.
 After a short introduction of the GRASS GIS system, a detailed description
 of the coverage prediction software was given.
 The tool enables a high level of flexibility and adaptability.
 It is composed of several GRASS modules for path loss calculation, a sectorizat
ion module, a module for radio signal coverage calculation, and additional
 modules for preparing input data and analyzing simulation results.
 Modules can be used individually or through the r.radcov module, written
 in Python, which interconnects individual modules into a complete radio
 signal propagation software package.
 At the end, the developed software was evaluated by comparing with the
 field measurements and simulation results obtained from a professional
 software application.
 The radio signal coverage prediction software implementation was quite
 straightforward, as API is well developed and documented.
 The set of built-in C functions is adequate.
 The possibility to study parts of the already implemented code is also
 very helpful.
 Extensive performance analyses showed satisfactory results.
 Compared to a professional network planning tool, the computation speed
 is slightly lower while the result accuracy is completely comparable irrespecti
ve of the terrain type or operational frequency.
 For better agreement between simulations and measurements, additional model
 tuning will be performed.
 In our future work, we also plan to expand the functionalities of the developed
 software package and build additional path loss modules for the urban and
 hilly rural environments that will also include the elements of ray tracing
 techniques and additional environment data [29].
 The achievement made so far represents a strong base for future work and
 is interesting both from the point of view of researchers as well as network
 developers.
 The whole source code of the radio signal coverage prediction tool together
 with detailed instructions will be publicly available at http://commsys.ijs.si/en
/software/grassradiocoverage tool.
 The tool can be freely used, modified and upgraded with new path loss modules.
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
