#LyX 1.6.5 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 345
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass article
\use_default_options true
\language english
\inputencoding auto
\font_roman default
\font_sans default
\font_typewriter default
\font_default_family default
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100

\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_amsmath 1
\use_esint 1
\cite_engine basic
\use_bibtopic false
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\author "" 
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Section
The common pilot channel and its influence in network performance
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The Common Pilot Channel (CPICH) is used as reference for handover 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citep
key "umts_world:handover"

\end_inset

, cell selection 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citep
key "3glteinfo:cellSelection"

\end_inset

 and cell reselection 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citep
key "flore2005:cell_reselection"

\end_inset

.
 It also defines the effective coverage area of the cell.
 Whenever a mobile phone is switched on, it measures the received level
 of chip energy to interference plus noise density ratio (
\begin_inset Formula $E_{c}/I_{0}$
\end_inset

) 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citep
key "WCDMAforUMTS_RadioAccessForThirdGenerationMobileCommunications"

\end_inset

 on the CPICH and tries to register with the cell providing the highest
 received CPICH level.
 This cell is then referred to as 
\emph on
serving cell
\emph default
.
 While in connected mode (i.e.
 during a call or data session), the mobile measures and reports the level
 and quality of CPICH to the base station for handover procedures.
 The transmission power of the CPICH can be read from the system information,
 and may be used to estimate the path loss from the base station to the
 mobile phone.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
By adjusting the CPICH power levels, the cell load can be balanced between
 neighboring cells.
 Reducing the CPICH power of one cell causes part of the terminal to be
 served by adjacent cells, while increasing it invites more terminals to
 handover to the own cell.
 Moreover, inter-cell interference is reduced improving network operation
 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citep
key "Vejlgaard:PhD"

\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
As a rule of thumb, the CPICH transmit power of the base stations should
 be set as low as possible, while ensuring that the serving cells and neighborin
g cells can be measured and thus providing coverage.
 Additionally, the CPICH power is part of the total transmitted power of
 the base station, which is generally limited.
 Thus, less CPICH power provides more power for traffic channels, increasing
 capacity.
 However, setting the CPICH power too low will cause uncovered areas between
 the cells, where CPICH power is too weak for the mobile to decode the signal.
 On the other hand, too high values of CPICH power will cause the cells
 to overlap too much and therefore create high levels of the aforementioned
 inter-cell interference, which will decrease network capacity.
 Nevertheless, a certain amount of overlapping is necessary for mobiles
 near the cell border to perform soft handover (SHO).
 SHO enables the mobile phone to be connected to more than one cell, thus
 improving throughput if the level of interference is not excessive.
 These SHO areas can be controlled by the strength of the CPICH power and
 are also used to counteract variations of received signal power.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
According to 3GPP, the mobile phone must be able to decode the pilot from
 a signal with 
\begin_inset Formula $E_{c}/I_{0}$
\end_inset

 of -20 dB 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citep
key "3GPP_TS_25.133"

\end_inset

.
 The service performance is limited by values from -15 to -16 dB.
 These limitations leave enough room for optimization changes to CPICH power
 as low as 0.5 dB, which may influence network performance in urban areas
 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citep
key "nawrocki2006understanding"

\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Although there are two types of CPICH, only the primary (P-CPICH) is mainly
 the focus for coverage and capacity optimization.
 The optional secondary (S-CPICH) channel is of no interest in this study,
 since it is usually set relative to the P-CPICH level.
 Because this work focuses on the optimization of the P-CPICH power, the
 term CPICH will be used for P-CPICH in the rest of the text.
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
